Add abstract and introduction (#2)
NLnetLabs/draft-koekkoek-dnsop-zone-file-format: draft-koekkoek-dnsop-zone-file-format.md

.# Abstract

The textual presentation formats originally specified in [@!RFC1034] and
[@!RFC1035], provide a portable representation of RRs in text form. They
define a tabular serialization format with provisions for convenient editing.

The existing specification is ambiguous, leading to incompatibilites between

> implementations that intend to be compliant. This document redefines the

Reviewer: I still think – at least at this stage – stating a goal of “providing a minimum profile of the presentation format that guarantees interoperability” (or somesuch) is better than just plain wanting to redefine it.

Author: I think we're on the same page. The intend is to outline how things should be interpreted by means of specifying syntax and semantics first. Then try to determine where we can be lenient (i.e. should vs. must). The problem with the format is that it's too ambiguous, so reaching consensus on what it should be ideally is a sensible approach?

Author: I think it's fixed, but we can refine it after merging the initial text.

expression of RRs and master files. Each subsequent format complements the
former and is best considered a superset.

## Textual expression of RRs

The textual expession of RRs adopts a style similar to that used in master
files to show the contents of RRs. The text states most RRs are shown on a
single line, but states line continuations are possible using parenthesis.
The text does not mention either comments or directives, but does mention the
use of blank lines and comments are used in RFCs. Therefore, it stands to
reason syntax and semantics for blank and rr entries as defined for master
files is adopted.

## Master files

Master files are text files that contain RRs in text form. Since the contents
of a zone can be expressed in the form of a list of RRs a master file is most
often used to define a zone, though it can be used to list a cache's contents.
(Quoted from [RFC1035], Section 5)

Master files provide a lean portable serialization format. Master files are
mostly generated these days, but the format clearly reflects the fact that
convenient editing by hand was a design goal.

FIXME: Mention Root Files (https://www.iana.org/domains/root/files) are valid

>        master files?

Author: Fixed

The master file format defines syntax and semantics for various types of
entries. Like [@!RFC1034], it states how to best show the contents of RRs,
but additionally introduces the concept of directives for more convenient
editing. e.g. allow for templating and deduplication through use of the
$INCLUDE directive.

> FIXME: The term master files is inconvenient, perhaps we should come up with

Reviewer: It occurs to me that the term is also wrong – it would _only_ be a master file if it contains the zone definition for a primary. If it lists the content of a cache (as given as an example in 1035), it decidedly isn’t a “master” any more. So, if it is a master file, it also is a zonefile. Otherwise it is only a file containing a list of records.

Author: I agree. RFC1035 even specifies it as a text file containing a set of RRs. In my understanding, there is only a slight difference in textual expression of RRs and the format in master files (directives). Maybe we should just formally combine the two and stick with presentation format. That's the practical solution to the problem(?) The term is also already defined as such in the terminology draft.

Reviewer: Makes sense: Presentation format for record data and presentation format for a set of records.

Author: Updated. Included a section. Still need to remove the term from other places in the document (except terminology), but we'll get there :+1:

that a line feed terminates an RR.

## Zone files

Zone files provide a standardized means to define zones in authoritative name
servers and are supported by most open source implementations. The additional
restictions that apply when defining a zone are clear and consice, no
additional syntax rules are introduced.

> All zone files are master files, but not all master files are zone files.

# Terminology

TODO

# Format

The format of master files is a sequence of entries. Entries are predominantly
line-oriented, though parentheses can be used to continue a list of items
across a line boundary, and text literals can contain CRLF within the text.
Any combination of tabs and spaces act as a delimiter between the separate
items that make up an entry.  The end of any line in the master file can end
with a comment.  The comment starts with a ";" (semicolon).

The following entries are defined:

    <blank>[<comment>]

    $ORIGIN <domain-name> [<comment>]

    $INCLUDE <file-name> [<domain-name>] [<comment>]

    <domain-name><rr> [<comment>]

    <blank><rr> [<comment>]

[@!RFC2308] extends the format to include the $TTL directive.

> [@!RFC3597] externs the format to allow for generic notation of RDATA.

Author: Fixed

FIXME: Probably include more from RFC1035, possibly with better wording.

FIXME: Define a proper EBNF grammar for the minimal syntax (if possible).

FIXME: Define RDATA must adhere to character strings. Meaning either
       \<contiguous\> set of characters without delimiters or \<quoted\> text.
       State that this does not mean all fields in RDATA may be quoted. State
       that this is important for performance reasons (SIMD), but also
       alleviates parsers from having to implement additional lexers for
       RDATA when new RDATA fields are introduced.

>        The exception here being SVCB, which is mostly already accepted. We do

Reviewer: I don’t think it is a good idea to try to open the discussion about the SVCB presentation format again. However, you might want to look at the ABNF given for character strings in this draft – I think it is incorrect, but it could serve as a starting point.

Author: We're not looking to change anything regarding SVCB, rather we're trying to keep future RFCs from using inconvenient syntax for RDATA fields. `foo="bar"` would be two separate tokens, which we can work with still, but if someone comes up with something really creative that would break the lexers in BIND (I think, they use a separate lexer too), NSD and simdzone. Possibly others. Often times it's not required to break it, I think people simply are not aware(?) We intend to specify the preferred syntax and then list SVCB as the exception.

Reviewer: I suspect there might be more records that will use a key/value pair format a la SVCB. It might be worthwhile to define the SVCB format as the standard for all of those?

Reviewer 2: Anything to reduce innovation in type formats would be welcome, although I suspect futile. :wink: 

I guess it is worth noting that future RDATA types that want to use key/value pairs and really want the `foo=bar` syntax that they should re-use the SVCB/HTTPS syntax.

Author: @shane-kerr, I suspect you're right. I've included your remark. We'll refine later.

       want to limit future RFCs though. SVCB could have chosen a slightly
       different presentation. e.g. drop the equals sign.

FIXME: Go into expansion rules for `@`.

FIXME: Lines starting with a dollar-sign must be considered a directive.

> FIXME: Evaluate for inclusion: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2181#section-8

Reviewer 2: Worthwhile including, although the language here indicates that it is about bits on the wire, and does not offer help to implementers reading zone files that violate this.

> FIXME: Evaluate for inclusion: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8767#section-4

Reviewer 2: Wow the text there breaks my brain a little. Makes sense though... treating TTL as 0 is probably always a bad idea. :wink: 

Based on the stale RFC, my own suggestion would be something like:

"Any software reading a zone file that encounters a TTL more than 2^31 - 1 SHOULD reduce the TTL to 2^31 -1 or consider the RR an error."

This should be okay with DNSSEC, since TTL a reduced TTL is okay AFAIK.

Probably a section (elsewhere I guess) on how to handle errors is reasonable, for example. Nothing super complex, but good to list options.

> FIXME: Evaluate for inclusion: https://github.com/NLnetLabs/ldns/commit/cb101c9

Reviewer 2: For me the only interesting issue there is that there is a corner case where the first record (an SOA in a zone file, but we're considering other textual representations using RR) does not have a TTL listed. I generally treat this as an error, although I guess there might be some other approach.

> FIXME: Consider https://github.com/NLnetLabs/simdzone/blob/main/FORMAT.md

Reviewer 2: We'll need to address most of those points eventually. :laughing:

.# Abstract

The master file format and corresponding textual representation of
RRs, originally specified in [@!RFC1035] and [@!RFC1034], and updated by many
RFCs since, is widely considered ambiguous. Leading to various (slightly)
incompatible dialects. This document clarifies syntax and semantics with
the intent to remove ambiguity.

> FIXME: Decide if this document should be informational or a standard.

{mainmatter}

# Introduction

[@!RFC1035] specifies the master file format, a file format containing RRs in
text form. The format, with additional considerations, is most frequently used
to define a zone, but can be used in other scenarios where RRs are stored in
text representation. [@!RFC1034] specifies a textual representation of RRs.
The text merely states a style similar to that in master files is adopted to
represent the contents of RRs, but does address a number of concepts more

> directly.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't read nicely for me

> The text merely states a style similar to that in master files is adopted to
> represent the contents of RRs, but does address a number of concepts more
> directly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Notice that [@!RFC1034] and [@!RFC1035] define three adjacent text formats

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[@!RFC1034] and [@!RFC1035] define three adjacent text formats
```

to express RRs and DNS data.

1. Textual representation of RRs ([@!RFC1034] section 3.6.1).
2. Master file format ([@!RFC1035] section 5.1).
3. Restrictions to master files when defining a zone ([@!RFC1035] section 5.2).

> The textual representation of RRs is (usually) well documented. RFCs that
> introduce new (RR) TYPEs either document the textual representation or the way
> to express RDATA in text is an established (industry) standard, e.g. textual
> representation of IP addresses. The restrictions that apply when using a
> master file to define a zone are clearly defined too.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RFCs that introduce new (RR) TYPEs document the textual representation of the TYPEs specific RDATA,
together with the restrictions that apply when used to define a zone in a master file.
```

> Since the resource data of the RR are given using knowledge of the typical
> representation for the data, given the intentional extensibility of the DNS,
> the master file format defines a forward compatible syntax for expressing RRs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The master file format defines a forward compatible syntax for expressing RRs.
```

> The format also introduces provisions for easier editing by text editor, but
> fails to clearly define semantics around these provisions. To fully understand
> the format, the reader must be familiar with the various record types in the
> DNS and have a sense of how things are used. This, in turn, leads to ambiguity
> and different dialects based on the readers background.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The format has provisions for easier editing by text editor, but
clearly defined semantics around these provisions are lacking.
This has led to different interpretations of the format in implementations.
```

> This document clarifies and formalizes syntax and semantics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document clarifies and formalizes syntax and semantics, to align implementations and increase interoperability.
```
